patterns-presenters.md, before:

﻿---
title: "🕺 Presenters"
image: "/images/presenter-code-sample.png"
---

<style type="text/css" rel="stylesheet">td:first-child { white-space: nowrap } thead { display: none; } </style>

🕺 Presenters
==============

[back](patterns-presentation.md)

[`Presenters`](#presenters) model the user interactions. A non-visual blue-print of the user interface.
This section describes how they are implemented in [this architecture](index.md).

<h2>Contents</h2>

- [The Role of the Presenter](#the-role-of-the-presenter)  
- [Working with ViewModels](#presenters-working-with-viewmodels)  
- [Infrastructure and Configuration](#presenters-infrastructure-and-configuration)
- [Internal Implementation](#presenters-internal-implementation)  
- [Delegating ViewModel Creation](#presenters-delegating-viewmodel-creation)  
- [Delegating More Responsibilities](#presenter-delegating-more-responsibilities)  
- [Complete Example](#presenters-complete-example)
- [Overhead](#presenters-overhead)
- [Using ViewModels Directly](#presenters-using-view-models-directly)
- [Conclusion](#presenters-conclusion)  


The Role of the Presenter
-------------------------

Unlike the [`ViewModels`](#viewmodels), which model the *data* shown on a screen, the [`Presenters`](#presenters) model the *actions* a user can perform on the screen.

Each [`View`](#views) gets its own [`Presenter`](#presenters), for instance:

```cs
class LoginPresenter { }
class ProductListPresenter { }
class ProductEditPresenter { }
class ProductDetailsPresenter { }
class CategorySelectionPresenter { }
```

Each *user action* is represented by a *method*, like these:

```cs
class ProductEditPresenter
{
    void Show() { }
    void Save() { }
}
```


Working with ViewModels
-----------------------

The action methods of the [`Presenter`](#presenters) work by a [`ViewModel-in`](#viewmodels), [`ViewModel-out`](#viewmodels) principle. An action method returns a [`ViewModel`](#viewmodels) that contains the data to display on screen:

```cs
class ProductEditPresenter
{
    ProductEditViewModel Show() { }
}
```

Action methods can also *receive* a [`ViewModel`](#viewmodels) parameter containing the data the user has edited:

```cs
class ProductEditPresenter
{
    void Save(ProductEditViewModel userInput) { }
}
```

Other action method parameters are also things the user has chosen:

```cs
class ProductEditPresenter
{
    void Show(string productNumber) { }
}
```

An action method can return a different [`ViewModel`](#viewmodels), not only the one that the [`Presenter`](#presenters) is about:

```cs
class ProductEditPresenter
{
    object Save(ProductEditViewModel userInput)
    {
        if (!successful)
        {
            // Stay in the edit view
            return new ProductEditViewModel();
        }

        // Redirect to list
        return new ProductListViewModel();
    }
}
```

Following those guidelines, the [`Presenters`](#presenters) form a structured model for what the user can do with the application.


Infrastructure and Configuration
--------------------------------

Sometimes you also pass [infra and config](layers.md#infrastructure) parameters to an action method:

```cs
class ProductEditPresenter
{
    object Save(
        ProductEditViewModel userInput, 
        IAuthenticator authenticator) // Infra-related parameter
    {
        // ...
    }
}
```

But it is preferred that the main chunk of the [infra and settings](layers.md#infrastructure) is passed to the [`Presenters`](#presenters) constructor:

```cs
class ProductEditPresenter
{
    /// <summary>
    /// Passing infra-related parameters to the constructor.
    /// </summary>
    public ProductEditPresenter(
        IRepository repository,
        IAuthenticator authenticator,
        string cultureName)
    {
        // ...
    }
}
```

Internal Implementation
-----------------------

Internally a [`Presenter`](#presenters) can use [business logic](layers.md#business-layer) and [`Repositories`](patterns-data-access.md#repository) to access the domain model.


Delegating ViewModel Creation
-----------------------------

It is preferred that [`ViewModel`](#viewmodels) creation is delegated to the [`ToViewModel`](#toviewmodel) layer (instead of creating them directly within the [`Presenters`](#presenters)):

```cs
public ProductEditViewModel Show(int id)
{
    // Delegate to ToViewModel layer
    var viewModel = entity.ToEditViewModel();
}
```

This way, [`ViewModel` creation](#viewmodels) is in centralized spot, so that changes only have to be made in one place.


Delegating More Responsibilities
--------------------------------

The responsibility of the [`Presenter`](#presenters) is not limited to [`ViewModel`](#viewmodels) creation alone, as you can see here:

```cs
/// <summary>
/// An action method with multiple responsibilities.
/// </summary>
public ProductEditViewModel Save(ProductEditViewModel userInput)
{
    // ToEntity
    Product entity = userInput.ToEntity(_repository);

    // Business
    new SideEffect_SetDateModified(entity).Execute();

    // Save
    _repository.Commit();

    // ToViewModel
    ProductEditViewModel viewModel = entity.ToEditViewModel();
    return viewModel;
}
```

This way the [`Presenter`](#presenters) layer is also responsible for [retrieving data](layers.md#data-layer), calling [business logic](layers.md#business-layer) and converting [`ViewModels`](#viewmodels) back to [`Entities`](patterns-data-access.md#entities). So it isn't a needless [pass-through layer](#pass-through-layers-) just delegating [`ViewModel`](#viewmodels) creation. It is a [combinator `class`](patterns-business-logic.md#facade), in that it combines multiple smaller aspects of the logic, by delegating work to various parts of the system.

A [`Presenter`](#presenters) action method might have the following steps:

|   |   |
|---|---|
| [`Security` checks](aspects.md#security) | Executing the necessary [security checks](aspects.md#security) to prevent unauthorized access.
| [`ViewModel`](#viewmodels) [`Validation`](patterns-business-logic.md#validators) | [`Validating`](patterns-business-logic.md#validators) a [`ViewModel`](#viewmodels) before converting it to an [`Entity`](patterns-data-access.md#entities). This can be useful when the data cannot always be converted to an [`Entity`](patterns-data-access.md#entities). If possible, [`Entity`](patterns-data-access.md#entities) [`Validation`](patterns-business-logic.md#validators) is preferred.
| [`ToEntity`](#toentity) | Converting [ViewModel](#viewmodels) data into [`Entity`](patterns-data-access.md#entities) data.
| [`GetEntities`](patterns-data-access.md#repository) | Retrieving [`Entity`](patterns-data-access.md#entities) data from the database.    
| [`Business`](layers.md#business-layer) | Executing the necessary [`Business` logic](layers.md#business-layer) for [data `Validation`](patterns-business-logic.md#validators), [`Calculations`](aspects.md#calculation), and decisions based on the data.
| `Commit` | Saving changes made to the [`Entities`](patterns-data-access.md#entities) to the database.
| [`ToViewModel`](#toviewmodel) | Mapping [`Entity`](patterns-data-access.md#entities) data to the corresponding [`ViewModel`](#viewmodels) `properties`, to prepare it for the [`view`](#views).
| `NonPersisted Data` | Copying data that does not need to be stored, from the old [`ViewModel`](#viewmodels) to the new, such as selections or search criteria.
| `Redirect` | Returning a different [`ViewModel`](#viewmodels), to trigger the UI to go to the appropriate page like a success message or the home screen.

This seems a bit of a throw-together of concepts, but that's how it is for a [combinator class](patterns-business-logic.md#facade), like the [`Presenter`](#presenters). Separating these steps is recommended, so that they do not get intermixed or entangled.

Not all of the steps are needed. [`ToEntity`](#toviewmodel) / [`Business`](layers.md#business-layer) / [`ToViewModel`](#toviewmodel) might be the typical steps. Slight variations in the order of the steps are also possible.


Complete Example
----------------

Here is a code sample with most of the discussed steps in it:

```cs
public class ProductEditPresenter
{
    public object Save(ProductEditViewModel userInput)
    {
        // Security
        SecurityAsserter.AssertLogIn();

        // ToEntity
        Product entity = userInput.ToEntity(_repository);

        // Business
        IValidator validator = new ProductValidator(entity);
        if (validator.IsValid)
        {
            new SideEffect_SetDateModified(entity).Execute();

            // Save
            _repository.Commit();

            // Redirect
            return new ProductListViewModel();
        }

        // ToViewModel
        var viewModel = entity.ToEditViewModel();

        // Non-Persisted Data  
        viewModel.Validation.Messages = validator.Messages;

        return viewModel;
    }
}
```


Overhead
--------

Even though the actual call to the [business logic](layers.md#business-layer) might be trivial, it may still be necessary to convert from [`Entity`](patterns-data-access.md#entities) to [`ViewModel`](#viewmodels) and back.

One reason might be the stateless nature of the web. It requires restoring state from the [`View`](#views) to the [`Entity`](patterns-data-access.md#entities) model in between requests. This is because the [`ViewModel`](#viewmodels) sent to the server may be incomplete, only containing the editable parts of the page. Restoration of [`Entity`](patterns-data-access.md#entities) state is also needed to delegate responsibilities to the right parts of the system, like delegate to the [business layer](layers.md#business-layer), that expects [`Entities`](patterns-data-access.md#entities).

You might save the server some work by doing *partial loads* instead of *full loads* or maybe execute client-native code. For more info, see: [First Full Load – Then Partial Load – Then Client-Native Code](#first-full-load--then-partial-load--then-client-native-code).


Using ViewModels Directly
-------------------------

Some actions might also operate onto [`ViewModels`](#viewmodels) directly instead:

```cs
public void ExpandNode(TreeViewModel viewModel, int id)
{
    var node = viewModel.Nodes.Single(x => x.ID == id);
    node.IsExpanded = true;
}
```

This may not be the first option to consider, but sometimes it makes sense.


Conclusion
----------

The [`Presenter`](#presenters) pattern is a commonly used design pattern for modeling user interactions in an application. By creating a [`Presenter`](#presenters) for each [`View`](#views) and working with [`ViewModels`](#viewmodels), we can achieve a clear modularization of our [presentation logic](layers.md#presentation-layer) and we ensure that each component has a specific responsibility. Delegating [`ViewModel`](#viewmodels) creation to the [`ToViewModel`](#toviewmodel) layer enables separation of concerns and allows the [`Presenter`](#presenters) to focus on its primary responsibility of modeling user interaction, delegating work to the various parts of the system.

The [`Presenters`](#presenters) form a [platform-independent](layers.md#platform-independence-1) layer below the actual front-end technology. All logic is hidden under a shell of [`ViewModels`](#viewmodels) and user actions. This makes it possible to swap out the front-end while leaving the underlying system intact.

[back](patterns-presentation.md)

Commit message:

🗣️ Patterns: Presentation: Presenters: Some relativistic language here and there.

patterns-presenters.md, after:

﻿---
title: "🕺 Presenters"
image: "/images/presenter-code-sample.png"
---

<style type="text/css" rel="stylesheet">td:first-child { white-space: nowrap } thead { display: none; } </style>

🕺 Presenters
==============

[back](patterns-presentation.md)

[`Presenters`](#presenters) model the user interactions. A non-visual blue-print of the user interface.
This section describes how they are implemented in [this architecture](index.md).

<h2>Contents</h2>

- [The Role of the Presenter](#the-role-of-the-presenter)  
- [Working with ViewModels](#presenters-working-with-viewmodels)  
- [Infrastructure and Configuration](#presenters-infrastructure-and-configuration)
- [Internal Implementation](#presenters-internal-implementation)  
- [Delegating ViewModel Creation](#presenters-delegating-viewmodel-creation)  
- [Delegating More Responsibilities](#presenter-delegating-more-responsibilities)  
- [Complete Example](#presenters-complete-example)
- [Overhead](#presenters-overhead)
- [Using ViewModels Directly](#presenters-using-view-models-directly)
- [Conclusion](#presenters-conclusion)  


The Role of the Presenter
-------------------------

Unlike the [`ViewModels`](#viewmodels), which model the *data* shown on a screen, the [`Presenters`](#presenters) model the *actions* a user can perform on the screen.

Each [`View`](#views) can get its own [`Presenter`](#presenters), for instance:

```cs
class LoginPresenter { }
class ProductListPresenter { }
class ProductEditPresenter { }
class ProductDetailsPresenter { }
class CategorySelectionPresenter { }
```

Each *user action* would be represented by a *method*, like these:

```cs
class ProductEditPresenter
{
    void Show() { }
    void Save() { }
}
```


Working with ViewModels
-----------------------

Our action methods of the [`Presenter`](#presenters) work by a [`ViewModel-in`](#viewmodels), [`ViewModel-out`](#viewmodels) principle. An action method returns a [`ViewModel`](#viewmodels) that contains the data to display on screen:

```cs
class ProductEditPresenter
{
    ProductEditViewModel Show() { }
}
```

Action methods can also *receive* a [`ViewModel`](#viewmodels) parameter containing the data the user has edited:

```cs
class ProductEditPresenter
{
    void Save(ProductEditViewModel userInput) { }
}
```

Other action method parameters are also things the user has chosen:

```cs
class ProductEditPresenter
{
    void Show(string productNumber) { }
}
```

An action method can return a different [`ViewModel`](#viewmodels), not only the one that the [`Presenter`](#presenters) is about:

```cs
class ProductEditPresenter
{
    object Save(ProductEditViewModel userInput)
    {
        if (!successful)
        {
            // Stay in the edit view
            return new ProductEditViewModel();
        }

        // Redirect to list
        return new ProductListViewModel();
    }
}
```

Following those guidelines, the [`Presenters`](#presenters) form a structured model for what the user can do with the application.


Infrastructure and Configuration
--------------------------------

Sometimes you also pass [infra and config](layers.md#infrastructure) parameters to an action method:

```cs
class ProductEditPresenter
{
    object Save(
        ProductEditViewModel userInput, 
        IAuthenticator authenticator) // Infra-related parameter
    {
        // ...
    }
}
```

But it is preferred that the main chunk of the [infra and settings](layers.md#infrastructure) is passed to the [`Presenters`](#presenters) constructor:

```cs
class ProductEditPresenter
{
    /// <summary>
    /// Passing infra-related parameters to the constructor.
    /// </summary>
    public ProductEditPresenter(
        IRepository repository,
        IAuthenticator authenticator,
        string cultureName)
    {
        // ...
    }
}
```

Internal Implementation
-----------------------

Internally a [`Presenter`](#presenters) can use [business logic](layers.md#business-layer) and [`Repositories`](patterns-data-access.md#repository) to access the domain model.


Delegating ViewModel Creation
-----------------------------

It is preferred that [`ViewModel`](#viewmodels) creation is delegated to the [`ToViewModel`](#toviewmodel) layer (instead of creating them directly within the [`Presenters`](#presenters)):

```cs
public ProductEditViewModel Show(int id)
{
    // Delegate to ToViewModel layer
    var viewModel = entity.ToEditViewModel();
}
```

This way, [`ViewModel` creation](#viewmodels) is in a centralized spot, so that changes only have to be made in one place.


Delegating More Responsibilities
--------------------------------

The responsibility of the [`Presenter`](#presenters) is not limited to [`ViewModel`](#viewmodels) creation alone, as you can see here:

```cs
/// <summary>
/// An action method with multiple responsibilities.
/// </summary>
public ProductEditViewModel Save(ProductEditViewModel userInput)
{
    // ToEntity
    Product entity = userInput.ToEntity(_repository);

    // Business
    new SideEffect_SetDateModified(entity).Execute();

    // Save
    _repository.Commit();

    // ToViewModel
    ProductEditViewModel viewModel = entity.ToEditViewModel();
    return viewModel;
}
```

This way the [`Presenter`](#presenters) layer is also responsible for [retrieving data](layers.md#data-layer), calling [business logic](layers.md#business-layer) and converting [`ViewModels`](#viewmodels) back to [`Entities`](patterns-data-access.md#entities). So it isn't a needless [pass-through layer](#pass-through-layers-) just delegating [`ViewModel`](#viewmodels) creation. It is a [combinator `class`](patterns-business-logic.md#facade), in that it combines multiple smaller aspects of the logic, by delegating work to various parts of the system.

A [`Presenter`](#presenters) action method might have the following steps:

|   |   |
|---|---|
| [`Security` checks](aspects.md#security) | Executing the necessary [security checks](aspects.md#security) to prevent unauthorized access.
| [`ViewModel`](#viewmodels) [`Validation`](patterns-business-logic.md#validators) | [`Validating`](patterns-business-logic.md#validators) a [`ViewModel`](#viewmodels) before converting it to an [`Entity`](patterns-data-access.md#entities). This can be useful when the data cannot always be converted to an [`Entity`](patterns-data-access.md#entities). If possible, [`Entity`](patterns-data-access.md#entities) [`Validation`](patterns-business-logic.md#validators) is preferred.
| [`ToEntity`](#toentity) | Converting [ViewModel](#viewmodels) data into [`Entity`](patterns-data-access.md#entities) data.
| [`GetEntities`](patterns-data-access.md#repository) | Retrieving [`Entity`](patterns-data-access.md#entities) data from the database.    
| [`Business`](layers.md#business-layer) | Executing the necessary [`Business` logic](layers.md#business-layer) for [data `Validation`](patterns-business-logic.md#validators), [`Calculations`](aspects.md#calculation), and decisions based on the data.
| `Commit` | Saving changes made to the [`Entities`](patterns-data-access.md#entities) to the database.
| [`ToViewModel`](#toviewmodel) | Mapping [`Entity`](patterns-data-access.md#entities) data to the corresponding [`ViewModel`](#viewmodels) `properties`, to prepare it for the [`view`](#views).
| `NonPersisted Data` | Copying data that does not need to be stored, from the old [`ViewModel`](#viewmodels) to the new, such as selections or search criteria.
| `Redirect` | Returning a different [`ViewModel`](#viewmodels), to trigger the UI to go to the appropriate page like a success message or the home screen.

This seems a bit of a throw-together of concepts, but that's how it is for a [combinator class](patterns-business-logic.md#facade), like our [`Presenters`](#presenters). Separating these steps is recommended, so that they do not get intermixed or entangled.

Not all of the steps are needed. [`ToEntity`](#toviewmodel) / [`Business`](layers.md#business-layer) / [`ToViewModel`](#toviewmodel) might be the typical steps. Slight variations in the order of the steps are also possible.


Complete Example
----------------

Here is a code sample with most of the discussed steps in it:

```cs
public class ProductEditPresenter
{
    public object Save(ProductEditViewModel userInput)
    {
        // Security
        SecurityAsserter.AssertLogIn();

        // ToEntity
        Product entity = userInput.ToEntity(_repository);

        // Business
        IValidator validator = new ProductValidator(entity);
        if (validator.IsValid)
        {
            new SideEffect_SetDateModified(entity).Execute();

            // Save
            _repository.Commit();

            // Redirect
            return new ProductListViewModel();
        }

        // ToViewModel
        var viewModel = entity.ToEditViewModel();

        // Non-Persisted Data  
        viewModel.Validation.Messages = validator.Messages;

        return viewModel;
    }
}
```


Overhead
--------

Even though the actual call to the [business logic](layers.md#business-layer) might be trivial, it may still be necessary to convert from [`Entity`](patterns-data-access.md#entities) to [`ViewModel`](#viewmodels) and back.

One reason might be the stateless nature of the web. It requires restoring state from the [`View`](#views) to the [`Entity`](patterns-data-access.md#entities) model in between requests. This is because the [`ViewModel`](#viewmodels) sent to the server may be incomplete, only containing the editable parts of the page. Restoration of [`Entity`](patterns-data-access.md#entities) state is also needed to delegate responsibilities to the right parts of the system, like delegate to the [business layer](layers.md#business-layer), that expects [`Entities`](patterns-data-access.md#entities).

You might save the server some work by doing *partial loads* instead of *full loads* or maybe execute client-native code. For more info, see: [First Full Load – Then Partial Load – Then Client-Native Code](#first-full-load--then-partial-load--then-client-native-code).


Using ViewModels Directly
-------------------------

Some actions might also operate onto [`ViewModels`](#viewmodels) directly instead:

```cs
public void ExpandNode(TreeViewModel viewModel, int id)
{
    var node = viewModel.Nodes.Single(x => x.ID == id);
    node.IsExpanded = true;
}
```

This may not be the first option to consider, but sometimes it makes sense.


Conclusion
----------

The [`Presenter`](#presenters) pattern is a commonly used design pattern for modeling user interactions in an application. By creating a [`Presenter`](#presenters) for each [`View`](#views) and working with [`ViewModels`](#viewmodels), we can achieve a clear modularization of our [presentation logic](layers.md#presentation-layer) and we ensure that each component has a specific responsibility. Delegating [`ViewModel`](#viewmodels) creation to the [`ToViewModel`](#toviewmodel) layer enables separation of concerns and allows the [`Presenter`](#presenters) to focus on its primary responsibility of modeling user interaction, delegating work to the various parts of the system.

The [`Presenters`](#presenters) form a [platform-independent](layers.md#platform-independence-1) layer below the actual front-end technology. All logic is hidden under a shell of [`ViewModels`](#viewmodels) and user actions. This makes it possible to swap out the front-end while leaving the underlying system intact.

[back](patterns-presentation.md)
