patterns/cascading.md, before:

﻿---
title: "🎋 Cascading"
description: "Upon deleting a main entity, child-entities can be deleted too. Implemented as a pattern in C#, to see these deletions explicitly take place."
image: "/images/cascading-page.png"
keywords:
  - cascading
  - delete
  - unlink
  - entities
  - design patterns
  - patterns
  - c#
  - .net
  - coding
  - programming
  - software engineering
  - software development
  - software design
  - software architecture
---

🎋 Cascading
============

[back](business-logic.md)

[`Cascading`](../aspects.md#cascading) means that upon deleting a main entity, child-entities are deleted too.

<img src="../images/cascading-code.png" width="700" />

<h2>Contents</h2>

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Code Files](#code-files)
- [DeleteRelatedEntities](#deleterelatedentities)
- [UnlinkRelatedEntities](#unlinkrelatedentities)
- [Delete Main Entity](#delete-main-entity)
- [Cascading & Repositories](#cascading--repositories)
- [Nuance](#nuance)
- [Alternative: Database Cascading](#alternative-database-cascading)
- [Alternative: ORM-Mapped Cascading](#alternative-orm-mapped-cascading)
- [Conclusion](#conclusion)


Introduction
------------

[`Entities`](data-access.md#entities) can be automatically `Deleted` along with other [`Entities`](data-access.md#entities). But if they are not inherently part of the main [`Entity`](data-access.md#entities), they would be [`Unlinked`](business-logic.md#unlink) instead.

This can be implemented as a pattern in [`C#`](../api/table.md#csharp). A reason to do it in [`C#`](../api/table.md#csharp), is to explicitly see in the code, that the other `Deletions` take place. It may be important not to hide this from view.

One way to implement [`Cascading`](../aspects.md#cascading), is through extension methods:  
`DeleteRelatedEntities` and `UnlinkRelatedEntities`.


Code Files
----------

Here is a suggestion for how to organize the [`Cascading`](#-cascading) code.

In the `csproj` of the [`Business` layer](../layers.md#business-layer), you could put a [sub-folder](../namespaces-assemblies-and-folders.md#patterns) called [`Cascading`](#-cascading) and put two code files in it:

```
JJ.Ordering.Business.csproj
    |
    |- Cascading
        |
        |- DeleteRelatedEntitiesExtensions.cs
        |- UnlinkRelatedEntitiesExtensions.cs
```


DeleteRelatedEntities
---------------------

Here is how  `DeleteRelatedEntitiesExtensions.cs` might look internally:

```cs
/// <summary>
/// Deletes child entities inherently part of the main entity.
/// </summary>
public static class DeleteRelatedEntitiesExtensions
{
    public static void DeleteRelatedEntities(this Order order)
    {
        ...
    }
}
```

In there, child [`Entities`](data-access.md#entities) are successively `Deleted`:

```cs
/// <summary>
/// Deletes child entities inherently part of the main entity.
/// </summary>
public static class DeleteRelatedEntitiesExtensions
{
    public static void DeleteRelatedEntities(this Order order)
    {
        // Delete child entities.
        foreach (var orderLine in order.OrderLines.ToArray())
        {
            _repository.Delete(orderLine);
        }
    }
```

(Note: The `ToArray` can prevent an `Exception` about the loop collection being modified.)

Before an extension method `Deletes` a child [`Entity`](data-access.md#entities), it might call [`Cascading`](#-cascading) upon the child [`Entity`](data-access.md#entities) too!

```cs
public static void DeleteRelatedEntities(this Order order)
{
    // Delete child entities.
    foreach (var orderLine in order.OrderLines.ToArray())
    {
        // Call cascading on the child entity too!
        orderLine.UnlinkRelatedEntities(); 

        _repository.Delete(orderLine);
    }
}
```


UnlinkRelatedEntities
---------------------

`UnlinkRelatedEntities` might be a little bit easier. It neither requires [`Repositories`](data-access.md#repository) not does it do much recursion:

```cs
/// <summary>
/// Unlinks related entities, not inherently part of the main entity.
/// </summary>
public static class UnlinkRelatedEntitiesExtensions
{
    public static void UnlinkRelatedEntities(this OrderLine orderLine)
    {
        orderLine.UnlinkOrder();
        orderLine.UnlinkProduct();
    }
}
```

Note that it uses the [Unlink](business-logic.md#unlink) pattern discussed earlier.


Delete Main Entity
------------------

The [`Cascading`](#-cascading) extension methods delete *related* [`Entities`](data-access.md#entities), not the *main* [`Entity`](data-access.md#entities). The idea behind that is: Where a main [`Entity`](data-access.md#entities) is `Deleted`, we could call the [`Cascading`](#-cascading) methods first:

```cs
entity.DeleteRelatedEntities();
entity.UnlinkRelatedEntities();

// Delete main entity separately.
_repository.Delete(entity);
```

That way we can see explicitly that more `Deletions` take place.


Cascading & Repositories
------------------------

The [`DeleteRelatedEntities`](#deleterelatedentities) methods might need [`Repositories`](data-access.md#repository) to perform the `Delete` operations.

You could pass these [`Repositories`](data-access.md#repository) as *parameters:*

```cs
public static void DeleteRelatedEntities(
    this Order order,
    /* Repository parameter */
    IOrderLineRepository repository)
{
    foreach (var orderLine in order.OrderLines.ToArray())
    {
        orderLine.UnlinkRelatedEntities();
        repository.Delete(orderLine);
    }
}
```

Or you might make [repositories](data-access.md#repository) available through a technique called [dependency injection](../practices-and-principles.md#dependency-injection).
 
It's up to you. The choice to use *extension* methods was also a matter of preference.


Nuance
------

Sometimes an [`Entity`](data-access.md#entities) does have related [`Entities`](data-access.md#entities) to [`Cascadedly`](#-cascading) [`Unlink`](business-logic.md#unlink) or `Delete`, but sometimes it doesn't, creating subtleties in the implementation.


Alternative: Database Cascading
--------------------------------

Instead of using [`ORM`](../api/orm.md) to perform the [`Cascading`](#-cascading) you could also configure it in the *database* instead using `Triggers` or `Delete Actions`.

But this might not play along nicely with our data access technology of choice: [`ORM`](../api/orm.md). Saving the changes could then complain about too many records modified.


Alternative: ORM-Mapped Cascading
---------------------------------

You can also configure the [`ORM`](../api/orm.md) through [`Mappings`](data-access.md#mapping) to automatically handle [`Cascading`](#-cascading).

A downside of this, is that the deletions are hidden away from view. It may surprise programmers, when related data is automatically `Deleted`. This can result in unintended consequences, taking away control from a programmer.


Conclusion
----------

Hopefully this introduced a way to build up [`Cascading`](#-cascading) code by just using a pattern in [`C#`](../api/table.md#csharp).


[back](business-logic.md)

Commit message:

🎶 Patterns: Cascading: Alternatives: Rephrasing some more.

patterns/cascading.md, after:

﻿---
title: "🎋 Cascading"
description: "Upon deleting a main entity, child-entities can be deleted too. Implemented as a pattern in C#, to see these deletions explicitly take place."
image: "/images/cascading-page.png"
keywords:
  - cascading
  - delete
  - unlink
  - entities
  - design patterns
  - patterns
  - c#
  - .net
  - coding
  - programming
  - software engineering
  - software development
  - software design
  - software architecture
---

🎋 Cascading
============

[back](business-logic.md)

[`Cascading`](../aspects.md#cascading) means that upon deleting a main entity, child-entities are deleted too.

<img src="../images/cascading-code.png" width="700" />

<h2>Contents</h2>

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Code Files](#code-files)
- [DeleteRelatedEntities](#deleterelatedentities)
- [UnlinkRelatedEntities](#unlinkrelatedentities)
- [Delete Main Entity](#delete-main-entity)
- [Cascading & Repositories](#cascading--repositories)
- [Nuance](#nuance)
- [Alternative: Database Cascading](#alternative-database-cascading)
- [Alternative: ORM-Mapped Cascading](#alternative-orm-mapped-cascading)
- [Conclusion](#conclusion)


Introduction
------------

[`Entities`](data-access.md#entities) can be automatically `Deleted` along with other [`Entities`](data-access.md#entities). But if they are not inherently part of the main [`Entity`](data-access.md#entities), they would be [`Unlinked`](business-logic.md#unlink) instead.

This can be implemented as a pattern in [`C#`](../api/table.md#csharp). A reason to do it in [`C#`](../api/table.md#csharp), is to explicitly see in the code, that the other `Deletions` take place. It may be important not to hide this from view.

One way to implement [`Cascading`](../aspects.md#cascading), is through extension methods:  
`DeleteRelatedEntities` and `UnlinkRelatedEntities`.


Code Files
----------

Here is a suggestion for how to organize the [`Cascading`](#-cascading) code.

In the `csproj` of the [`Business` layer](../layers.md#business-layer), you could put a [sub-folder](../namespaces-assemblies-and-folders.md#patterns) called [`Cascading`](#-cascading) and put two code files in it:

```
JJ.Ordering.Business.csproj
    |
    |- Cascading
        |
        |- DeleteRelatedEntitiesExtensions.cs
        |- UnlinkRelatedEntitiesExtensions.cs
```


DeleteRelatedEntities
---------------------

Here is how  `DeleteRelatedEntitiesExtensions.cs` might look internally:

```cs
/// <summary>
/// Deletes child entities inherently part of the main entity.
/// </summary>
public static class DeleteRelatedEntitiesExtensions
{
    public static void DeleteRelatedEntities(this Order order)
    {
        ...
    }
}
```

In there, child [`Entities`](data-access.md#entities) are successively `Deleted`:

```cs
/// <summary>
/// Deletes child entities inherently part of the main entity.
/// </summary>
public static class DeleteRelatedEntitiesExtensions
{
    public static void DeleteRelatedEntities(this Order order)
    {
        // Delete child entities.
        foreach (var orderLine in order.OrderLines.ToArray())
        {
            _repository.Delete(orderLine);
        }
    }
```

(Note: The `ToArray` can prevent an `Exception` about the loop collection being modified.)

Before an extension method `Deletes` a child [`Entity`](data-access.md#entities), it might call [`Cascading`](#-cascading) upon the child [`Entity`](data-access.md#entities) too!

```cs
public static void DeleteRelatedEntities(this Order order)
{
    // Delete child entities.
    foreach (var orderLine in order.OrderLines.ToArray())
    {
        // Call cascading on the child entity too!
        orderLine.UnlinkRelatedEntities(); 

        _repository.Delete(orderLine);
    }
}
```


UnlinkRelatedEntities
---------------------

`UnlinkRelatedEntities` might be a little bit easier. It neither requires [`Repositories`](data-access.md#repository) not does it do much recursion:

```cs
/// <summary>
/// Unlinks related entities, not inherently part of the main entity.
/// </summary>
public static class UnlinkRelatedEntitiesExtensions
{
    public static void UnlinkRelatedEntities(this OrderLine orderLine)
    {
        orderLine.UnlinkOrder();
        orderLine.UnlinkProduct();
    }
}
```

Note that it uses the [Unlink](business-logic.md#unlink) pattern discussed earlier.


Delete Main Entity
------------------

The [`Cascading`](#-cascading) extension methods delete *related* [`Entities`](data-access.md#entities), not the *main* [`Entity`](data-access.md#entities). The idea behind that is: Where a main [`Entity`](data-access.md#entities) is `Deleted`, we could call the [`Cascading`](#-cascading) methods first:

```cs
entity.DeleteRelatedEntities();
entity.UnlinkRelatedEntities();

// Delete main entity separately.
_repository.Delete(entity);
```

That way we can see explicitly that more `Deletions` take place.


Cascading & Repositories
------------------------

The [`DeleteRelatedEntities`](#deleterelatedentities) methods might need [`Repositories`](data-access.md#repository) to perform the `Delete` operations.

You could pass these [`Repositories`](data-access.md#repository) as *parameters:*

```cs
public static void DeleteRelatedEntities(
    this Order order,
    /* Repository parameter */
    IOrderLineRepository repository)
{
    foreach (var orderLine in order.OrderLines.ToArray())
    {
        orderLine.UnlinkRelatedEntities();
        repository.Delete(orderLine);
    }
}
```

Or you might make [repositories](data-access.md#repository) available through a technique called [dependency injection](../practices-and-principles.md#dependency-injection).
 
It's up to you. The choice to use *extension* methods was also a matter of preference.


Nuance
------

Sometimes an [`Entity`](data-access.md#entities) does have related [`Entities`](data-access.md#entities) to [`Cascadedly`](#-cascading) [`Unlink`](business-logic.md#unlink) or `Delete`, but sometimes it doesn't, creating subtleties in the implementation.


Alternative: Database Cascading
--------------------------------

Instead of using [`ORM`](../api/orm.md) to perform the [`Cascading`](#-cascading) you could also configure the *database* to do it for us. You could use `Triggers` or `Delete Actions` for that.

But this might not play along nicely with our data access technology of choice: [`ORM`](../api/orm.md). Saving the changes could then complain about too many records modified, because more records were deleted than the [`ORM`](../api/orm.md) was aware of.


Alternative: ORM-Mapped Cascading
---------------------------------

You can also configure the [`ORM`](../api/orm.md) through [`Mappings`](data-access.md#mapping) to automatically handle [`Cascading`](#-cascading).

A downside of this, is that the deletions are hidden away from view. It may surprise programmers, when related data is automatically `Deleted`. This can result in unintended consequences, taking away control from the programmer.


Conclusion
----------

Hopefully this introduced a way to build up [`Cascading`](#-cascading) code by just using a pattern in [`C#`](../api/table.md#csharp).


[back](business-logic.md)
